[DOC-1185] Client's different SSL modes with YSQL Connection manager (#30709)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/stable/additional-features/connection-manager-ysql/ycm-setup.md

| {{<icon/no>}} | SCRAM-SHA-256-PLUS  | A variant of SCRAM-SHA-256 over TLS channels that performs TLS channel-binding as part of authentication. |
| {{<icon/yes>}} | MD5 | Password-based authentication where the user's password is by default stored in MD5 encryption format in the database. |
| {{<icon/partial>}} | Cert  | Currently, Connection Manager does not support the HBA [auth-method](../../../secure/authentication/host-based-authentication/#auth-method) `cert`, where the server authenticates users via the client certificate (for example, CN/DN mapping). Client-side `sslmode` (such as verify-ca, verify-full), where the client verifies the *server* certificate, is a different layer and is supported (see [SSL modes and encryption in transit](#ssl-modes-and-encryption-in-transit)). |

## SSL modes and encryption in transit

Client connection behavior and server-side policy are handled separately as follows:

- **SSL mode** (client-side connection behavior): controls whether the client uses TLS and how it verifies the server (disable, allow, prefer, require, verify-ca, verify-full). Connection Manager supports all of these client SSL modes.

> - **ysql_hba.conf** ([host-based authentication](../../../secure/authentication/host-based-authentication/)): controls whether the connection must be over TLS, if the client must present a certificate, and whether the server authenticates the client via that certificate. Currently, Connection Manager does not support HBA certificate authentication.

Author: ```suggestion
- **ysql_hba.conf** ([host-based authentication](../../../secure/authentication/host-based-authentication/)): controls client authentication for YSQL connections, including whether connections must use SSL/TLS, whether the client must present a certificate, and whether the server verifies the client's identity using that certificate. Currently, Connection Manager does not support HBA certificate authentication.
```

| {{<icon/no>}} | SCRAM-SHA-256-PLUS  | A variant of SCRAM-SHA-256 over TLS channels that performs TLS channel-binding as part of authentication. |
| {{<icon/yes>}} | MD5 | Password-based authentication where the user's password is by default stored in MD5 encryption format in the database. |
| {{<icon/partial>}} | Cert  | Currently, Connection Manager does not support the HBA auth method (server-side), where the server authenticates the user via the client's certificate (for example, CN/DN mapping). Client-side `sslmode` (such as verify-ca, verify-full), where the client verifies the *server* certificate, is a different layer and is supported. See [Client SSL modes and TLS](#client-ssl-modes-and-tls). |

## Client SSL modes and TLS

To enable encrypted connections between your client application and YugabyteDB via the YSQL Connection Manager (TLS/SSL), configure the following [yb-tserver](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/) flags:

- Set [use_client_to_server_encryption](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#use-client-to-server-encryption) to true.

> - Set [certs_for_client_dir](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#certs-for-client-dir) to the path containing the TLS certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set [certs_for_client_dir](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#certs-for-client-dir) to the path containing the server TLS certificates.
```

**Client and server connection handling**

Client connection behavior and server-side policy are handled separately as follows:

- **SSL mode** (client-side connection behavior): controls whether the client uses TLS and how it verifies the server (disable, allow, prefer, require, verify-ca, verify-full). Connection Manager supports all of these client SSL modes.

> - **pg_hba.conf** (server-side cert-related settings): controls whether the connection must be over TLS, if the client must present a certificate, and whether the server authenticates the client via that certificate. Currently, Connection Manager does not support this HBA authentication method.

Reviewer: In YBDB is this not ysql_hba.conf

### Connection Manager SSL modes

The YSQL Connection Manager can be configured in the following two modes with respect to SSL, driven by your cluster TLS settings. The mode is reflected in the connection manager configuration file which is the Odyssey configuration that the Connection Manager process reads at startup. (see the [connection manager template config file](https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/blob/2025.2.2/src/yb/yql/ysql_conn_mgr_wrapper/ysql_conn_mgr.template.conf)).

> #### Cluster TLS is disabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Encryption in transit disabled
```

| require | Uses secure connection, fails if not available | Yes. If connection fails, PostgreSQL or connection manager sends 'N' (not supported) message to the client; client reports: "server does not support SSL, but SSL was required" | No. Client's SSL attempt is rejected by connection manager. |
| verify-ca | Behaves like require. Additionally, verifies server cert against CA, or fails if no valid matching CA certificates are found. | Yes. If connection fails, PostgreSQL or connection manager sends 'N' (not supported) message to the client; client reports: "server does not support SSL, but SSL was required" | No. Client's SSL attempt is rejected by connection manager. |
| verify-full | Behaves like verify-ca. Additionally, verifies that the server cert matches the host. | Yes. If connection fails, PostgreSQL or connection manager sends 'N' (not supported) message to the client; client reports: "server does not support SSL, but SSL was required" | No. Client's SSL attempt is rejected by connection manager. |

With the default HBA configuration above, customizing the HBA file does not change behavior for any of these client SSL modes.

> #### Cluster TLS is enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Encryption in transit enabled
```

When TLS is enabled in the cluster (by setting the flags `use_client_to_server_encryption` and `certs_for_client_dir` as above), the connection manager automatically switches to require mode (that is, it starts with Odyssey `tls "require"` by reading the TLS-related flags and overwriting the connection manager config file).

The default HBA file in this mode is as follows:

```text
# This is an autogenerated file, do not edit manually!
# Internal configuration:
# local all postgres yb-tserver-key
hostssl all all all trust
local all yugabyte trust
```

> The following table describes how each client SSL mode behaves when connecting through the YSQL Connection Manager with the default HBA configuration when cluster TLS is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table describes how each client SSL mode behaves when connecting via YSQL Connection Manager with the default HBA configuration and encryption in transit enabled.
```

> | Client SSL mode | Description | Same as PostgreSQL? | Authentication mechanism followed? | HBA customization changes behavior? |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Client SSL mode | Description | Same as PostgreSQL? | Connection succeeds? | HBA customization changes behavior? |
```

| require | Uses secure connection, fails if not available. | Yes. Encrypted connection is established. | Yes. An SSL attempt establishes connection with connection manager. | No |
| verify-ca | Behaves like require. Additionally, verifies server cert against CA, or fails if no valid matching CA certificates are found. | Yes. Encrypted connection is established and client verifies the TLS certificate. | Yes. An SSL attempt establishes connection with connection manager. | No |
| verify-full | Behaves like verify-ca. Additionally, verifies that the server cert matches the host. | Yes. Encrypted connection is established and client verifies the TLS certificate and hostname. | Yes. An SSL attempt establishes connection with connection manager. | No |

### Certificate verification (verify-full)

When using `sslmode=verify-full`, the security handshake happens at the client level as follows:

- Client-side validation: The client checks if the server's certificate is signed by a trusted CA.
- Identity match: The client ensures the certificate's hostname matches the actual server address.

> - Connection failure on mismatch: If either checks fail, the connection is rejected (for example, JDBC and ysqlsh perform this verification).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Connection failure on mismatch: If either check fails, the connection is rejected (for example, JDBC and ysqlsh perform this verification).
```

| {{<icon/no>}} | SCRAM-SHA-256-PLUS  | A variant of SCRAM-SHA-256 over TLS channels that performs TLS channel-binding as part of authentication. |
| {{<icon/yes>}} | MD5 | Password-based authentication where the user's password is by default stored in MD5 encryption format in the database. |
| {{<icon/partial>}} | Cert  | Currently, Connection Manager does not support the HBA auth-method `cert`, where the server authenticates users via the client certificate (for example, CN/DN mapping). Client-side `sslmode` (such as verify-ca, verify-full), where the client verifies the *server* certificate, is a different layer and is supported (see [SSL modes and encryption in transit](#ssl-modes-and-encryption-in-transit)). |

## SSL modes and encryption in transit

Client connection behavior and server-side policy are handled separately as follows:

- **SSL mode** (client-side connection behavior): controls whether the client uses TLS and how it verifies the server (disable, allow, prefer, require, verify-ca, verify-full). Connection Manager supports all of these client SSL modes.

> - **ysql_hba.conf** (host-based authentication settings): controls whether the connection must be over TLS, if the client must present a certificate, and whether the server authenticates the client via that certificate. Currently, Connection Manager does not support HBA certificate authentication.

Reviewer 2: nit: can we check official postgers doc about wording, if can be improved. Otherwise looks fine.

### Encryption in transit

> YSQL Connection Manager can be configured for universes with or without encryption in transit enabled. The mode is determined by the settings in the Connection Manager configuration file (the Odyssey configuration that the Connection Manager process reads at startup). You can review the default settings in the [template configuration file](https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/blob/2025.2.2/src/yb/yql/ysql_conn_mgr_wrapper/ysql_conn_mgr.template.conf).

Reviewer 2: > the Odyssey configuration that the Connection Manager process reads at startup
The odyssey configuration can be removed. Simply which conn mgr process reads at startup.

| prefer (default in PostgreSQL) | Tries secure connection first, then unencrypted. | Yes. Encrypted connection is established. | Yes. First SSL attempt establishes connection with Connection Manager. |
| require | Uses secure connection, fails if not available. | Yes. Encrypted connection is established. | Yes. An SSL attempt establishes connection with Connection Manager. |
| verify-ca | Behaves like require. Additionally, verifies server cert against CA, or fails if no valid matching CA certificates are found. | Yes. Encrypted connection is established and client verifies the TLS certificate. | Yes. An SSL attempt establishes connection with Connection Manager. |
| verify-full | Behaves like verify-ca. Additionally, verifies that the server cert matches the host. | Yes. Encrypted connection is established and client verifies the TLS certificate and hostname. | Yes. An SSL attempt establishes connection with Connection Manager. |

> ### Certificate verification (verify-full)

Reviewer 2: nit: should this section be moved up ? as it describes what verify-full means and then we should present how it's behaviour with conn mgr with help of table along with other sslmodes.
